doc/guides: migrate rpl networking guide from wiki (#22460)
RIOT-OS/RIOT: doc/guides/networking/rpl.mdx

Reviewer: this needs to be rpl.md**x** since you are importing a module

For the sake of simplicity, we are setting the `PORT` and `DEBUG_ADAPTER_ID` values for each board manually in this tutorial.

List all connected boards, their port, and serial number.

```sh
$ make list-ttys

path         | driver  | vendor      | model                           | model_db | serial           | ctime    | iface_num
-------------|---------|-------------|---------------------------------|----------|------------------|----------|----------
/dev/ttyACM0 | cdc_acm | RIOT-os.org | adafruit-feather-nrf52840-sense | None     | AD57F0199B27E0C5 | 14:27:03 | 0
/dev/ttyACM1 | cdc_acm | RIOT-os.org | adafruit-feather-nrf52840-sense | None     | A595DD98EC28FB7C | 14:27:07 | 0
/dev/ttyACM2 | cdc_acm | RIOT-os.org | adafruit-feather-nrf52840-sense | None     | A766F77F8FC7A4A4 | 14:27:13 | 0
```

Open one terminal window for each board and set the `BOARD`, `PORT`, and `DEBUG_ADAPTER_ID` for each board.
Set the `DEBUG_ADAPTER_ID` to the printed `serial` value.

```sh
export BOARD=adafruit-feather-nrf52840-sense PORT=/dev/ttyACM0 DEBUG_ADAPTER_ID=AD57F0199B27E0C5
```

In each window, compile and flash RIOT.

> ```sh
> $ make flash term
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
make flash term
```

Removing the $ makes it copy-pastable with the little button that pops up :) (The suggestion is broken though, don't apply it)

Author: I was using the conventions from the [riot exercises](https://github.com/netd-tud/riot-exercises#conventions), to differentiate between Linux shell and RIOT shell commands.
Does that convention not apply in the guides here?

Reviewer: I have never seen that convention if I am totally honest with you, the repo is also outside of the RIOT org :nerd_face: :point_up: 

That being said, I think it's generally fine to keep it as is, esp. since you are following that convention. This was more of a "neat to have".

Author: Don't have a strong opinion. The fact that you can't copy a command well if it's prepended with `$` also annoys me sometimes ^^
Does someone else have an opinion on this? cc @mguetschow

Reviewer 2: Now that we have fancy starlight, couldn't we somehow mark the codeblock as being the host or RIOT shell and visualize that in starlight outside of the copy-able area? somehow annotate the codeblock HTML and a simple CSS rule should do.

Other than that, I would prefer removing the $ so it is easy to copy. _Should_ be clear from the context anyhow what is meant.

Reviewer: It appears like that we can do this by directly using the Code component with the theme attribute, however, this might make it look weird depending on whether you use dark/light theme, e.g. if we make RIOT default to a dark blue theme for code blocks it would then look really out of place when using the light theme and I don't see an (easy) option to give a theme depending on that. (All that to say "Yes but hard")

Reviewer 3: I am also in favor to remove the $, as I have also already done at many places, we should update the docs

```mk
include $(RIOTBASE)/dist/testbed-support/Makefile.iotlab
```

To start an experiment, execute:

```sh
$ IOTLAB_USER=<iotlab_user> IOTLAB_PHY_NODES=10-12+14-16 IOTLAB_EXP_NAME=test IOTLAB_DURATION=60 BOARD=iotlab-m3 make iotlab-exp
```

This command may prompt for a password to authenticate your IoT-Lab account.
You will need to use the same password that you use for the IoT-Lab [dashboard](https://www.iot-lab.info/testbed).

|Parameter|Description|
|---------|-----------|
|IOTLAB_USER|Specify your IoT-Lab account name. The same name used for the [dashboard](https://www.iot-lab.info/testbed)|
|IOTLAB_PHY_NODES|Choose the nodes for the experiment. If a node is not available, the Makefile will return an error specifying which nodes are busy|
|IOTLAB_EXP_NAME|Name of the experiment|
|IOTLAB_DURATION|Duration in minutes|
|BOARD|The board to use: iotlab-m3|

More information and further parameters can be found in the [README](https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/master/dist/testbed-support/README.iotlab.md).

To flash your application onto all nodes in the experiment, use the `iotlab-flash` command:

```sh
$ IOTLAB_USER=<iotlab_user> BOARD=iotlab-m3 make iotlab-flash

> ```

Author: The `iotlab-exp` command before should already flash the firmware onto all nodes. 
However, the command somehow failed for me, so I removed the flashing part from `iotlab-exp` locally and added this step here. Before merging the PR, the `iotlab-exp` command should be fixed (or I should figure out why it didn't work for me specifically) and this section revisited.

---
title: RPL Routing
description: Guide on how to configure a multihop network with RPL routing.
---

import FileTree from '@components/FileTree.astro';

> 

Reviewer 4: Maybe we can have some words as an introduction about what this is and what RPL is?
I'm not familar with it, so I can't really propose anything 😅

Author: Done 3ec1a86ebc.

## Prerequisites

> Please have a look at [The Getting Started](https://guide.riot-os.org/getting-started/installing/) and [Creating an Application](https://guide.riot-os.org/advanced_tutorials/creating_application/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Please have a look at [The Getting Started](https://guide.riot-os.org/getting-started/installing/)
and [Creating an Application](https://guide.riot-os.org/advanced_tutorials/creating_application/).
```

For documentation, we also try to keep the line length below 100 characters max (and 80 characters ideally), with the exception of URLs that can't have line breaks in them.

Reviewer 4: There are a lot of long lines in the following document, please try to shortem them if possible.

Author: Done d196dcf3eb.

## Preparation

For routing capabilities, it is necessary that the RPL implementation is compiled into your RIOT application.
This can be achieved by adding `gnrc_rpl` to the `USEMODULE` variable in your application's `Makefile`.
You can consult [this Makefile](https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/master/examples/networking/gnrc/networking/Makefile) for a complete example.

For the following tutorials, the [gnrc_networking](https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/master/examples/networking/gnrc/networking/) example will be used.
All commands listed here will be issued from within the `examples/networking/gnrc/networking` directory.
You may use your own application after adjusting the `Makefile` as described above.

## Starting RIOT

You can run the tutorial either on local hardware, native, or the FIT IoT-Lab.

### Using Local Hardware

If you have three or more hardware boards with IEEE 802.15.4 radio capabilities, you can run the tutorial on actual hardware.
This allows you to experiment with different distances between the boards and, e.g., create multi-hop topologies.

> In this tutorial, I am using the Adafruit Feather nRF52840 Sense boards.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This tutorial is based on the Adafruit Feather nRF52840 Sense board.
```

IMO the passive form is better to use here.

If you are using different hardware, simply replace the `BOARD` value in the commands below with your board name.

#### Handling Multiple Boards

A detailed description of development with multiple boards can be found in the [build system guide](/build-system/flashing/#handling-multiple-versions-of-the-same-board).
For the sake of simplicity, we are setting the `PORT` and `DEBUG_ADAPTER_ID` values for each board manually in this tutorial.

List all connected boards, their port, and serial number.

> ```sh

Reviewer 4: `````suggestion
```
`````

These are also not really shell commands but rather printout of a command.

Author: Why would it not be a shell command? I think the format: 
```sh
$ command
printout
printout
```
is quite common for markdown code blocks. [^1]
Without the `sh` we loose syntax highlighting, which is generally recommended for all fenced code blocks. [^2]

[^1]: https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint/blob/main/doc/md014.md
[^2]: https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint/blob/main/doc/md040.md

Reviewer 3: Currently in starlight we don't use the "$" prefix because this is in conflict with the copy button and starlight already visualizes quite clear that it is a shell command.

We right now usually just split the command and output into 2 different code blocks at other places in the guides.

$ make list-ttys

path         | driver  | vendor      | model                           | model_db | serial           | ctime    | iface_num
-------------|---------|-------------|---------------------------------|----------|------------------|----------|----------
/dev/ttyACM0 | cdc_acm | RIOT-os.org | adafruit-feather-nrf52840-sense | None     | AD57F0199B27E0C5 | 14:27:03 | 0
/dev/ttyACM1 | cdc_acm | RIOT-os.org | adafruit-feather-nrf52840-sense | None     | A595DD98EC28FB7C | 14:27:07 | 0
/dev/ttyACM2 | cdc_acm | RIOT-os.org | adafruit-feather-nrf52840-sense | None     | A766F77F8FC7A4A4 | 14:27:13 | 0
```

Open one terminal window for each board and set the `BOARD`, `PORT`, and `DEBUG_ADAPTER_ID` for each board.
Set the `DEBUG_ADAPTER_ID` to the printed `serial` value.

```sh
export BOARD=adafruit-feather-nrf52840-sense PORT=/dev/ttyACM0 DEBUG_ADAPTER_ID=AD57F0199B27E0C5
```

> In each window, compile and flash RIOT.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In each window, compile and flash RIOT. Please note that you can not have
multiple compilations running at the same time in a RIOT directory, so
you have to compile and flash one at a time.
```

That has bitten me more than once :D

```sh
$ make flash term
```

You will be greeted by RIOT's shell in all three terminals.

In the following sections, the term node\{0,1,2\} will be used to refer to the RIOT instances running on the boards connected to /dev/ttyACM\{0,1,2\}, respectively.

### Using Native

Information about the native port of RIOT can be found in [Family:-native](https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/wiki/Family:-native).

#### Downside

Because all nodes are connected via the `tapbr0` bridge, all nodes are reachable from each other within a single hop.
Therefore, it is not possible to test real multi-hop communication with this method.
[Virtual-riot-network](https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/wiki/Virtual-riot-network) describes how native nodes can be deployed with a virtualized network topology using tap interfaces.
See [README.desvirt.md](https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/master/dist/tools/desvirt/README.desvirt.md) for more information.

#### Creating Tap Interfaces

The native RIOT instances communicate through tap interfaces.

> We provide a [script](https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/wiki/Family%3A-native/blob/master/dist/tools/tapsetup/tapsetup) that supports the setup and cleanup of such interfaces.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We provide a [script](https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/master/dist/tools/tapsetup/tapsetup) that supports the setup and cleanup of such interfaces.
```

The link is kinda broken 🤔

To set up tap interfaces and a bridge that connects each tap interface:

```sh
$ ../../../../dist/tools/tapsetup/tapsetup -c 4
```

With the `-c` parameter, you can specify how many tap interfaces you want to create (default: 2).
To delete all tap interfaces, you can execute:

```sh
$ ../../../../dist/tools/tapsetup/tapsetup -d
```

See the help for further information about additional parameters:

```sh
$ ../../../../dist/tools/tapsetup/tapsetup -h
```

> You can verify that the tap interfaces have been created successfully by looking at the output of `ip l`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can verify that the tap interfaces have been created successfully by looking at the output of the `ip l` shell command.
```

This list should include the new interfaces `tapbr0`, `tap0`, `tap1`, `tap2`, and `tap3`.

#### Compiling for Native

```sh
$ make clean all
```

Type the following command in three different terminals, using `tap0`, `tap1`, and `tap2`, respectively.

> ```sh

Reviewer 4: `````suggestion
```
`````

These are not really shell commands.

Author: See https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/pull/22460#discussion_r3570106302.

To direct a command specifically to a single node, the node ID must be prepended to the command.

E.g., start RPL on interface 5 for all nodes:

```sh
> rpl init 5

m3-10;> rpl init 5
m3-10;successfully initialized RPL on interface 5
m3-11;> rpl init 5
m3-11;successfully initialized RPL on interface 5
m3-12;> rpl init 5
m3-12;successfully initialized RPL on interface 5
m3-14;> rpl init 5
m3-14;successfully initialized RPL on interface 5
m3-15;> rpl init 5
m3-15;successfully initialized RPL on interface 5
m3-16;> rpl init 5
m3-16;successfully initialized RPL on interface 5
```

Start RPL only on one node:

```sh
> m3-10; rpl init 5

m3-10;successfully initialized RPL on interface 5
```

In the tutorial below we use _node\{0,1,2\}_ to refer to specific nodes.
These commands should be prepended with the node ids, e.g., `m3-10;`, `m3-11;`, and `m3-12;` for node0, node1, and node2, respectively.

## Initializing RPL

In order to use RPL, we have to choose a RPL root node.
We will choose node0 as the RPL root.

With the `ifconfig` command, we can get the configured interfaces for a particular RIOT node.
On my system, the output is as follows for node0.

> It may look slightly different if you are using different hardware or are running on native.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An example output for `node0` is shown below. It may look slightly different
if you are using different hardware or are running on native.
```
